The
campaign was on the heels of Sharpstown and at a
time when the Speaker of the House was being tried
for bribery in Abilene. I was going on during the
political campaign.
Legislators were running for cover. When I
received a call, asking me if I would come to
Abilene and testify. Even though I had a campaign
and had opponents that would obviously make use of
such a trip, I decided that I could not in good
conscience say no. I made the trip to Abilene,
arrived there one evening to find out that the
defense had rested and decided to not call any
witnesses. I never have understood why the
defense rested in that case without calling
witnesses, but that was the decision they made.
Shortly after returning home, the
jury found Speaker Butcher guilty of bribery and
were prepared to sentence him. I then received a
second call to please come back to Abilene and
appear as a character witness. I did make a trip to
Abilene and was prepared to appear as a character
witness but was never called. The fact that I had
made the trips to Abilene and even though there was
no record of my appearing in Abilene, the election
campaign got very nasty and every effort was made
to link me with the Speaker. I think the biggest
mistake I made was not getting the family together
and explaining to them what was going on and why I
was conducting myself as I was. that even the older
children did not understand all the mudslinging
and name-calling that was taking place. Recall
one evening, we're sitting down to dinner, my
five-year-old daughter came in and said, Daddy,
that man is back on TV again saying, where was Bill
Presnell when he was supposed to be
her hands on her hips and was very indignant about
it all.
Changed her expression finally to say, where were
you, Daddy? That particular attack had nothing to
do with Sharpstown, but had everything to do with
the fact that a special session was called during
the political campaign. And at a time when I had a
commitment to be at a barbecue that was given in my
honor, Robertson
County, a county which had been newly added to the
district. The fact was that I had stayed in Austin
until late that afternoon and made arrangements
for a friend to pick me up in his airplane. But I
could get the details of some legislation worked
out before leaving the Capitol. Same opponent was
running an ad in the newspaper each day for about 30
days that simply said, why did Preston go to
Abilene? In the meantime, the Dirty Thirty was
supporting another candidate that I had as an
opponent. And I recall one evening at a political
rally when he pointed out that the Dirty Thirty was
supporting him and his candidacy to defeat me for
reelection. I followed up to point out that the
leader of the Dirty Thirty was the person who had
passed a resolution to commend the Boston
Strangler. A campaign year when it was throw the
rascals out and I feel very fortunate that I
survived the campaign with two opponents without
having to face a runoff. have a special session
later that year after the campaigns were over, and
at that session on the first day, Speaker Murcher
resigned from his post as Speaker of the House.
This meant that we had to elect a new Speaker, and
the test was between Rayford Price and DeWitt
Hale. I chose to support Rayford Price because we
all knew that DeWitt Hale was merely a stand-in for
the interim so that Price Daniel Jr. could be
elected speaker come 19 January 1973 for the
regular session. Price Daniel Jr. did not want to
run the risk of being defeated in this election
that was held during the special session. The
Constitution requires that a speaker be elected
at the convening of each regular session of the
legislature unless there's a vacancy and then of
course there has to be an election to fill the
vacancy. In a close election, Rayford Price was
elected Speaker, but was later defeated in his
campaign for re-election by Fred Head, who
he had been paired with in
the redistricting process.
The defeat of Rayford Price threw the doors wide
open for Price Daniel Jr. to be elected speaker
when the legislature convened in January 1973. It
was during this special session in 1972 that I
agreed to disperse of my dairy herd and have a state
representative auctioneer the cattle off. Sale
was held in December and I felt that this was
positioning me to either to leave the legislature
and find a full-time employment upon the
completion of the regular session in 1973. There
was always a possibility that I could find
employment that would allow me to continue to
serve in the legislature, but there were no
guarantees. The legislative session convening
in January 1973 became known as the Reform
Session. We had a new speaker in Price Daniel, Jr.
We had a new lieutenant governor in Bill Hobby and a
new governor in Dolph Briscoe. The first actions
that a new legislature takes is to adopt its rules
of procedure. This usually follows immediately
after the election of the Speaker. The
legislature had adopted some changes in the rules
during the special session under Rayford Price.
One of those rules required that a person that
served on a committee continue to serve on that
committee as long as he was in the legislature. We
called it the retention seniority rule. The rules
were laid out. I found that the retention
seniority rule had been removed. And so when the
time came to take the vote on the rules, I voted
against the rules. When you vote against the
rules, you're voting against the speaker. And
this vote probably cost me a seat on the House
Appropriations Committee. I just could not bring
myself to vote for rules that remove the retention
seniority rule, which I thought was a good rule and
would provide continuity on the committee.
I think that is sorely needed on all committees in
the House of Representatives. Instead of serving
on the House Appropriations Committee, which has
consumed so much time, I was placed on the
Education Committee. I
was chaired by Dan Kubiak. Being served on the
Appropriations Committee for two terms gave me a
different perspective with regards to education
legislation that came before the committee, and I
felt like I was able to make a contribution to the
piece of legislation that we were able to prevail
upon. had to do with the way public kindergarten
was structured. In 1971, a kindergarten bill had
been passed, but it was not to allow all
five-year-olds to attend public kindergarten.
It was very difficult, almost impossible to
explain to the public why the legislature passed
such a bill saying that half of the children could
go to public kindergarten but half of them could
not. Came up with the idea that we could do the same
thing for the same money by making kindergarten
half day and allowing all children to attend. I had
just finished
going to a private kindergarten and it was my
impression that attending for a half a day, which
she did, was adequate and all that a five-year-old
could handle. I did not have the votes in committee
to prevail on the issue, but adopted a strategy
that I have never seen used before or since with
regards to influencing legislation. I conspired
with two or three members to attend the committee
meetings but with the understanding that they
would not attend the meetings and therefore the
committee would not have a quorum and could not
take a vote. I needed to be there to be sure to
challenge the chairman that a quorum was not
present and that he could not take a vote. After
several weeks I was contacted by the lobbyists for
the Texas State Teachers Association and agreed
that to a half-day kindergarten program if I would
help get a quorum back to the Education Committee
meeting. Agreed, and at the next meeting we had a
quorum and voted the bill out with a half-day
kindergarten provision. It was also in 1973 that
the new members, which there were many, decided
that there should be a Constitutional
Convention. So by resolution, one was created to
convene in 1974. The members of the
Constitutional Convention would be the members
of the Texas House and the Texas Senate. Early in
the session, the reform bills started pouring out
of committees, such bills as open meetings, open
records, etc. There was a lobby control bill, and
all these bills had serious constitutional
questions and concerns. the members of the House
were determined to pass the legislation because
of the political consequences if they voted
against them. I voted against most of these bills
because I felt like they were bad legislation. I
recorded my reason for voting against certain
bills, particularly the lobby control bill, and
This was very helpful when the campaign season
rolled around and my opponent was attempting to
use this as a campaign issue. We'll discuss this in
more detail later. A bill that I was happy to
co-sponsor would create a veterinary diagnostic
laboratory in Amarillo and would be a part of the
laboratory in College Station that is under the
direction of the Texas A&M University System
Board of Regents. The primary sponsors of the bill
both in the House and the Senate were from Amarillo
where the lab would be located. We were able to pass
the bill in the House and send it over to the Senate
When it left the House, it was unclear as to where
the laboratory would be located. When the House
bill was returned by the Senate to the House, the
amendment
saying that the laboratory would be located in
Amarillo had been added.
was unhappy with this language and I have never
known what his problem was since he was a resident
of Amarillo. Rumor was that he wanted to locate it
in Canyon on the campus of West Texas State
University.
He never told me that. The speaker was ready to
concur in the Senate amendments to the House bill
and send the bill on to the governor. The speaker
called me forward and told me that the sponsor was
in the hospital and was there any controversy
about the bill. And I said, not if we pass it now. He
said, then let's move to concur. I
did move to concur knowing
that the sponsor of the bill was not going to be
happy with what I did. Before that day, the sponsor
was released from the hospital and came to the
House floor and
made the unusual move to recall the bill. Okay,
two-thirds vote. After he explained that he did
not want the bill to pass in its present state, he
was able to get a two-thirds vote. He usually has a
right to control his own bill to that extent.
Rather than send the bill to a conference
committee, however, he placed the bill on the
table, subject to call, which meant that it could
be brought from the table and voted on,
concurrence could be voted on at any time. Texas
Farm Bureau was keenly interested in seeing the
bill passed, and on the last day, with the bill
still laying on the table and not having been acted
upon,
asked me if there was anything that could be done to
pass the bill. It suddenly occurred to me that
there was a legislator in the Texas Panhandle that
might could pass the bill if he would be willing to
do so, but that I did not feel like that I could do it.
This legislator walked by about this time And we
called him aside and the Farm Bureau asked him if he
would be willing to pick up the bill and pass it. He
said, if I get enough contact from constituents in
my district that they want this bill passed before
the day is out, I will pass it. I will attempt to pass
it. The wife was from the Texas Panhandle and I knew
at least one cattleman in the Texas Panhandle that
was very active politically. So I placed a phone
call to
this person and explained the situation, and that
was all that was necessary. I'm sure the Farm
Bureau was making its contacts at the same time, so
in a short time, there were on the desk of the
panhandle legislator a large stack of telephone
messages. This provided the legislator the
excuse that he needed to
pick up and pass the bill, even though his
colleague was still not for passing it. As a result
of that action, the Texas A&M University System
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory in Amarillo
exists today. One Sunday afternoon a supposedly
non-controversial bill was placed on the consent
calendar that provided or the University of Texas
system to have authority over marine-related
research.
The University of Texas system had a fine facility
at Port Aransas, but little use was being made of
it. It appeared that this bill would subtly give
the University of Texas system statutory
authority over all research dealing with the
coast and the oceans. Before Texas A&M University
was training about half of the oceanographers in
the world, all at the graduate level. I moved to
block the bill from passage. And I understand
later that this created dialogue
between the University of Texas system and the A&M
system regarding oceanographic research and
marine-related research for the first time. To
this day, Texas A&M is much stronger in the deep
water, blue water, ocean research. And
University of Texas is predominantly in the
business of providing research in the bays and
estuaries. To measure that, I was unable to stop in
the House, but we were able to get it killed in the
Senate. dealt with the treatment of Prairie View
by the Texas A&M University System Board of
Regents. There was a school of thought that
Prairie View was being treated badly because of
facilities that at Prairie View were not up to
standards of those on the main campus. Most of
these facilities are supported from non-tax
revenues. For example, the football coach, I'm
told, wanted a new stadium there and could not
understand why they could not build a new stadium
using state funds.
When the resolution came up on the floor, Prairie
View students had just testified before the House
Appropriations Committee that from time to time
they had no hot water in the dormitories. The issue
became a racial one and members of the legislature
who had minorities in their district still voted
for the resolution. They did not want to be labeled
as a racist and wanted to get along with the
minority members in the legislature as their
numbers had grown dramatically in the last
redistricting. One of the bills that I was
carrying that session would have authorized new
construction at the Uvalde Research Center under
the Texas A&M University system. It was the home of
the governor and was a bill that he wanted to see
passed. The Senate had passed the bill very early
in the session, but it was brought up in the
Calendars Committee,
not placed on the calendar until the last day of the
session.
The bill was seven pages deep into the calendar,
And there was no way that the House was going to pass
seven pages of bills on the last day of the session.
Early in the day, I spoke to the governor in his
office about the problem. He immediately turned
and picked up a red telephone on his desk.
Ed Price, referring to the Speaker of the House, I
want to see you in my office right now. The Speaker
left the podium and was in the Governor's office in
less than two minutes. I asked the Governor,
should I leave? And he said, no, you stay right
there. When the Speaker came in, the Governor
informed him that The bill that he wanted to see
passed was on page seven, and he wanted the bill
passed before the legislature adjourned that
day. Speaker proceeded to tell him that he had had
problems with the state senator who was the author
of the bill, and the governor interrupted and
said, I'm concerned with your problems with the
Senate sponsor. This is a bill that I want to see
passed. The House of Representatives still had
not gone on the calendar and started passing any of
the bills. Shortly thereafter, the first bill was
laid out. That first bill happened to be on the top
of page seven. To my amazement, No one called a
point of order that the speaker cannot start
anywhere except at the top of the calendar, page
one. Finally, get to the bottom of the calendar
where the Uvalde Research Center bill had been
placed, and shortly after it was passed, the House
adjourned. sign he died. House Daniel Jr., as
Speaker, had agreed to serve only one term,
and this, in my opinion, left him in somewhat a
weakened position toward the end of the session.
The legislators were faced with a constitutional
convention to convene in January of 1974
Price Daniel Jr. was the only person that was
campaigning for to be chairman of the
Constitutional Convention. So in 1974, he was
elected to
chair the Constitutional Convention. Also
election year, and I drew another opponent. that
this time a city councilman from Bryan and a
longtime personal friend. Not take me long to
realize that the local publisher of the local
daily newspaper was helping my opponent in every
way that he could. Our campaign was getting a lot of
publicity. Most of it was not to my favor. I recall
one Saturday morning picking up the paper and
there was an article by my opponent
reflecting upon my vote against the lobby control
bill and how this was such a bad vote. I immediately
drafted a rebuttal and located the editor of the
newspaper and told him that I would be bringing a
rebuttal down and I expected to have equal space
with my opponent. The comment was that that
article was supposed to run in the Sunday's paper.
And I said that someone made a mistake and ran it
this morning on Saturday. But I expected mine to be
in the Sunday paper. After a series of attacks by my
opponent, I finally told the publisher of the
paper one day that if the race continue to be on the
front page there would be no need for me to buy any
paid advertising. After that the story stopped.
This time the Constitutional Convention was
going on which meant that for four days out of the
week I was in Austin as a member of the
Constitutional Convention. I maintained some
continuity In the political campaign,
I set up a Friday morning breakfast with
constituents and campaign workers. And this gave
me a way to catch up on things that had happened
during the week that I needed to be aware of. And
that the breakfast worked great in providing me
with the information that I needed and recruiting
more campaign workers as we brought in new people
from time to time to the breakfast. The convention
did take a 30-day recess prior to the primary
election to allow the members to go home and
campaign before the primary elections. In Texas
at that time there were few general elections and
many primary elections. or as state legislative
races were concerned.
One of the issues my opponent raised through
street talk was, was I a Christian? Did I go to
church? Truth was that I had been teaching Sunday
school in a small rural church for about nine or ten
years. held virtually every office in the local
church where I was a member. Question in my mind is
how do you answer a rumor
of that sort? To me that an issue that would be
coming before the Constitutional Convention in
the very near future was one of gambling. It sounds
simple enough to simply say you're opposed to
gambling, But I had a very large constituency that
liked to play bingo. And there was a big question as
to whether or not bingo would be included when the
gambling issue came up. I decided the best way to
approach the issue before I made a statement that
would hopefully
stop any further street talk about my Christian
faith was to call a friend in the legislature who
was a devout Catholic and get his views on how to
handle the issue. With his guidance, we were able
to make a public release as to our opposition to
gambling without alienating a large
constituency of people that like to play bingo.
And we hopefully defused the church issue for the
balance of that campaign. My opponent had worked
many hours in Robertson County, and because of the
Constitutional Convention, I was able to make
very few trips to the county. As a result, I did not
feel good about the vote I would get in Hearn.
There was a scandal in Hearn at the time with
regards to the city councilman. And in addition to
that, I had missed a big highway dedication in the
town. I did very well in Hearn. I got 60% of the vote.
I knew that that was a signal that I would win the
election. I've often wondered if the fact that the
local newspaper in Brine that had been carrying
the Hearn scandal on the front page for so long had
alienated the people in Hearn and when the paper
endorsed my opponent, it may have backfired and
helped me in in the surrounding area. It did hurt my
ego not to get the endorsement of the local
newspaper. It may have done as much good as it did
harm. The election was over and I had won. I
returned to Austin to finish up the work on the
Constitutional Convention. The education
committee was the first one to finish its work and I
had been given primary responsibility for
rewriting the permanent university fund section
of the education article. Able to keep the higher
education portion intact and the permanent
university fund intact with very little
controversy. Most of the controversy dealt with
the constitutional provision that provides for
the school system. The big issue was the use of the
term equal educational opportunity and what this
meant. It was viewed by some conservatives as a
threat to local control. that the education
article was the first article that the speaker
wanted out on the floor to be debated and passed in
the Constitutional Convention by the full
convention. And ironically, he
relied on me to help him get the bill out very
quickly. a little ribbing over this by some of my
colleagues who were observing what was going on,
saying they were glad that Daniel and I were
finally getting along, something that we could
agree on. The education article in the
Constitutional Convention went rather smoothly
compared to some of the other articles. The
article that got the most debate was the general
provisions article the reasons that every issue
that one could think of could fit under the general
provisions article that one of the legislators
who was known for his levity and used it as a way to
make a point now and then offered an amendment to
license environmentalists as an amendment to the
General Provisions article of the Constitution.
To paraphrase him, that he had sat on a committee
the session before where some environmental
bills had come up, and he said, we have people come
before the committee and say they are concerned
environmentalists, and we do not know whether
they're environmentalists or just some nut that
walked in off the street. For that reason, he was
recommending that we license environmentalists
and then we'd know which ones are
environmentalists and which ones are just nuts
that walk in off the street. It was not serious, but
he did make a point. The race for Speaker was rather
heated during the Constitutional Convention and
was an undertow that was play a rather significant
role. I refer to it as an undertow because you
didn't see it every day, but you knew it was there.
For Speaker of the House to be elected in January
1975 was wide open. There were
seven or eight legislators that were competing
for the speakership.
I had decided early in the race to support Bill
Clayton as a candidate for Speaker.
Clayton had become tagged as so conservative that
he probably had little chance of ever winning the
race. The more likely winners were either Fred
Head, who had the backing of all the new members of
the legislature who he had campaigned with early
on, and he had the backing of Labor. Carl Parker, a
third candidate, had a more moderate backing.
In fact, his support probably ranged from
ultra-liberal to conservative. He saw Parker as
the eventual winner and probably for that reason
supported him. Price Daniel Jr., who was chairing
the Constitutional Convention, had been a friend
of Labor in the past, but decided that He must
include a right to work provision in the
Constitution or it would fail. The new members of
the legislature that were serving their first
term were the chief supporters of constitutional
revision and wanted to see the Constitutional
Convention succeed. Fred Head saw an opportunity
to rule the labor support for his speaker's race by
going to labor and saying that he would not support
the Constitutional Convention
document if they would support him for speaker. So
an agreement was struck. I was a close lieutenant
of Price Daniels, Jr., so this meant that he would
vote for the constitutional revision. Mixed
emotions about how to vote for a constitutional
revision. had some real problems with some of the
provisions that were there and felt like it was
better not to have constitutional revision. On
the other hand, it would probably be in Mr.
Clayton's favor if I voted for the constitutional
revision.
Show good faith with the freshman members that
wanted to see revision take place. When the final
vote was called for, it required 121 votes to be
cast in favor of constitutional revision. I voted
for revision, but could see that it was going to
fail.
The voting board was left open for an extended
period of time in an attempt to get the 121 votes. It
started out with about 115 votes and eventually
got to 118 but could never get above that number. So
it fell three votes short of passing the revision
document to the voting public for their approval
or disapproval. More importantly, it meant the
demise of Mr. Head's race for the speakership. It
was after the Constitutional Convention had
adjourned, the new members that were supporting
Mr. Head announced that they were withdrawing
their support from him but were not committing to
another candidate at that time. They said they
were going to take their time, interview all the
candidates, and make their decision as a group. A
short time later, just before Labor Day in 1974,
Fred Head,
to Bill Clayton and told him that his support had
deteriorated and that he was ready to join forces
with him, with Clayton, and see if he
could help get him elected as Speaker. Parker had
felt all along that Fred Head's support would
naturally come to him because there were many of
the more liberal members that were supporting
fred head and they could not support mr clayton mr
clayton however was able to persuade the more
liberal faction that was supporting head that he
would always be fair with them where they
certainly would have questions in their own mind
about parker treating them fairly all led to a
phone call I received on Friday before Labor Day
saying that several of Mr. Clayton's supporters
were getting together in Austin at the Driscoll
Hotel to see if they could come use of support that
Fred had given Mr. Clayton. It was not a carefully
planned out event, I decided to go and call
Saturday morning to say that I would be on my way
shortly. They asked me if I would pick up the new
member that had been elected in the district just
south of me. He was one of the members that was
uncommitted and was a holdout since they had
broken with Fred Head. I contacted the member,
picked him up in Navasota, and we drove to Austin.
It turned out that he was very key in persuading the
leadership of the new members to all come over to
Mr. Clayton's side. This was truly a Labor Day
blitz that hit the opposition before they could
recover.